Bug 1825425 - Add RFC 0009 to remove interactors and controllers (#1466)
mozilla-mobile/firefox-android: docs/rfcs/0009-remove-interactors-and-controllers.md

Generally, the interactor/controller pattern is also intended to move business logic out of classes tied to the Android framework and into classes that are more testable, re-usable, composable, digestible, and which handle a single responsibility. More reading on architecture goals is available [in our Architecture Decisions](../../fenix/docs/Architecture-Decisions.md#goals).

These goals are all met reasonably well by the existing pattern, but it also contributes to unnecessary class explosion, general code complexity, and confusion about responsibility for each architectural type. This becomes especially true when wondering how responsibility should be split between interactors and controllers. It seems that interactors are often included as a matter of precedent and not to necessarily facilitate all the goals mentioned above, and this has lead to a large amount passthrough interactors.

### Proposal goals

1. Increase code comprehensibility
2. Have clear delineation of responsibility between architectural components
3. Retain ability to manage state outside of fragments/activities/etc

> 4. Ability for proposal to be adopted incrementally

Author: My intent here was to list some of the expected outcomes if we adopted this RFC. I agree that 'the ability to manage state outside of fragments/activities/etc' is not a new problem that this RFC will be solving, which is actually why I didn't list it as a motivation. That said, I thought it was worth calling out that the goal is to not lose anything in terms of a testable, decoupled (from the Android framework) architecture

```kotlin
class PocketCategoriesViewHolder(
    composeView: ComposeView,
    viewLifecycleOwner: LifecycleOwner,
) : ComposeViewHolder(composeView, viewLifecycleOwner) {

    @Composable
    override fun Content() {
        val categories = components.appStore
            .observeAsComposableState { state -> state.pocketStoriesCategories }.value
        val categoriesSelections = components.appStore
            .observeAsComposableState { state -> state.pocketStoriesCategoriesSelections }.value

        PocketTopics(
            categoryColors = categoryColors,
            categories = categories ?: emptyList(),
            categoriesSelections = categoriesSelections ?: emptyList(),
            onCategoryClick = { name -> 

>                 components.appStore.dispatch(AppAction.TogglePocketStoriesCategory(name)) 

Reviewer: Here, you have made a change to replace the interactor with the dispatch call. Can you add an example of what the other end of the store looks like that connects to this change?

I'm trying to visualize how would features like bookmarks connect to the storage and the snackbar UI layer, or navigate.

Author: I had originally intended for this to not necessarily be a deep dive into Redux patterns since there is so much prior art, but I will add some additional examples for clarity.

            },
        )
    }
}
```

This should simplify the search for underlying logic by:

> - moving business logic into an expected and consistent component (the reducer)

Reviewer: Related to the point above, it would help to add examples of what this looks like with a reducer that needs to connect to multiple things that the controllers take care of today.

// 4. DefaultHistoryInteractor implements HistoryInteractor
override fun open(item: History) {
    historyController.handleSelect(item)
}

// 5. Clicking into `handleSelect` leads to `HistoryController`
// 6. DefaultHistoryController implements `HistoryController::handleSelect`
override fun handleSelect(item: History) {
    if (store.state.mode === HistoryFragmentState.Mode.Syncing) {
        return
    }

    store.dispatch(HistoryFragmentAction.AddItemForRemoval(item))
}

// 7. reducer handles state update
private fun historyStateReducer(
    state: HistoryFragmentState,
    action: HistoryFragmentAction,
): HistoryFragmentState {
    return when (action) {
        is HistoryFragmentAction.AddItemForRemoval ->
            state.copy(mode = HistoryFragmentState.Mode.Editing(state.mode.selectedItems + action.item))
        ...
    }
}
```

Following this proposal, the above would change to something like:

```kotlin
// 1. in LibrarySiteItemView
setOnClickListener {
    when {
        selected.isEmpty() -> store.dispatch(HistoryFragmentAction.AddItemForRemoval(item))
        ...
    }

> }

Reviewer 2: 🙌🏽

                    },
                )
            }
            currentCategoriesSelections.size == POCKET_CATEGORIES_SELECTED_AT_A_TIME_COUNT -> {
                state.copy(
                    pocketStoriesCategoriesSelections = state.pocketStoriesCategoriesSelections
                        .minusOldest()
                        .plus(
                            PocketRecommendedStoriesSelectedCategory(
                                name = action.categoryName,
                            )
                        ),
                )
            }
            else -> {
                state.copy(
                    pocketStoriesCategoriesSelections =
                    state.pocketStoriesCategoriesSelections +
                            PocketRecommendedStoriesSelectedCategory(action.categoryName)
                )
            }
        }
        // Selecting a category means the stories to be displayed needs to also be changed.
        updatedCategoriesState.copy(
            pocketStories = updatedCategoriesState.getFilteredStories(),
        )
    }
}
```

---

### Interacting with the storage layer through middlewares

> What if a feature requires some async data for its initial state, or needs to write changes to disk? There are no restrictions on running impure methods in middleware, so we can respond to an actions that would changes to the storage layer from middlewares. A good example is [ContainerMiddleware](../../android-components/components/feature/containers/src/main/java/mozilla/components/feature/containers/ContainerMiddleware.kt)

Author: Ah, good point. I had thought to use a relative link for the exact opposite reason - so that it would reference the up-to-date version. I suppose that doesn't account for the path breaking either though

Note that the `InitAction` here subscribes to a `Flow` from the database, which will continue to collect updates from the storage layer and dispatch actions to change the state accordingly.

Overall, this should convey the following improvements
- All state updates are guaranteed to be pure and in a single component, allowing for easy testing and reproduction.
- All side-effects are logically grouped into middlewares, allowing for testing strategies specific to the type of side-effect.
- Several indirect abstraction layers are removed, minimizing mental model of code.

---

### Single- vs multi-store patterns and mobile constraints

> One big difference between Redux for web and for mobile is that mobile is generally under tighter resource constraints. These constraints are the primary driver for our current usage of `lib-state`, which more closely mirrors the "Flux" pattern instead of the "Redux" pattern. One of the primary differences between the two patterns is simply the number of stores they suggest using. Redux will usually have a single store, while Flux would have multiple. 

Reviewer: > One big difference between Redux for web and for mobile is that mobile is generally under tighter resource constraints. These constraints are the primary driver for our current usage of `lib-state` ...

Huh? Where did this come from? 🙂

Reviewer: I don't really know what this paragraph adds. I would remove it.

> Multiple stores allows us to manage memory better. For example, state for Settings will be be automatically collected when a `SettingsStore` falls out of scope, instead of being kept permanently in a global store. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple stores allows us to manage memory better. For example, state for a Settings UI screen can be held in a `SettingsStore` which can be cleared from memory (garbage collected) when no longer in that UI context.
```

I think what you're trying to say here is that there is no need to hold screen-specific state in a global store.

This proposal is _not_ suggesting that we move to a pure Redux model yet. There are huge wins we can achieve in terms of architectural consistency by only removing interactors/controllers and switching them to a store model. 

This will mean that we will continue to have "global" stores like the `AppStore` and the `BrowserStore` co-existing with "local" stores like the `HistoryFragmentStore`. This can introduce complexity in terms of determining the best place to add state, middlewares, and actions. Generally speaking, prefer using local stores over global stores whenever possible.

Moving into the future, we will investigate options for consolidating our stores. It should be relatively straightforward to at least combine our global stores. Investigation is also ongoing into whether we can create "scoped" stores that combine a local store with the global store such that the local portion of the store can still automatically fall out of scope and respect the constraints of developing on mobile.

---

> ## Drawbacks

Author: I do think these are worth noting, if only for awareness. Thanks!

Redux-like patterns have a bit of a learning curve, and some problems can be more difficult to solve than others. For example, handling side-effects like navigation or loading state from disk. The benefits of streamlining our architecture should outweigh this, especially once demonstrative examples of solving these problems are common in the codebase.

---

## Proposal acceptance and future plans

> To demonstrate some of the concepts discussed in this proposal in more detail, an example patch will be produced that shows a refactor of a prominent feature of the app - history. Following this, a series of meetings will be hosted to discuss in detail any questions or concerns. 

Author: I don't necessarily mean for this to prolong the process. I'll set a deadline for comments once the example becomes available and host those during the time leading up to the deadline. It does seem like that level of detail should be left out of this though, thanks

1. Reacting to a user-initiated action
2. Reacting to the result of a state change

The first will be covered in more detail below and is handled by middleware, where side-effects are started in reaction to some dispatched action.

The second requires a mechanism of observation for a Store's state, triggering some logic or work in response to state updates. On Android these observations are often started in the UI layer in order to tie them to lifecycle events. However, UI framework components like activities, fragments, and views are notoriously difficult to test and we want to avoid a situation where these classes become too large or complex.

There are already some existing mechanisms for doing this included in the lib state library:

1. `Fragment.consumeFrom` will setup a Store observation that is triggered on _every_ state update in the Store. The [HistoryFragment updating its view hierarchy with all state updates](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/910afa889ebc5222a1b9a877837de5c55244d441/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/library/history/HistoryFragment.kt#L196) is one example.

> 2. `Flow.ifChanged` can be combined with things like `Fragment.consumeFlow` or `Store.flowScoped` for finer-grained state observations. This will allow reactions to specific state properties updates, like when the [HistorySearchDialogFragment changes the visibility of the AwesomeBar](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/910afa889ebc5222a1b9a877837de5c55244d441/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/library/history/HistorySearchDialogFragment.kt#L189).

Reviewer 3: I think this might need to be updated when https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/pull/2479 lands

            Pocket.HomeRecsCategoryClickedExtra(
                categoryName = categoryClicked.name,
                newState = "selected",
                selectedTotal = initialCategoriesSelections.size.toString(),
            ),
        )
    }
```

If we break this down into a pseudocode algorithm, we get the following steps:
1. Read the current state from the store
2. If the category is being deselected
    1. Dispatch an action to update the state
    2. Record a metric that the category was deselected
    3. Return early
3. If the number of categories selected would be over max
    1. Dispatch an action deselecting the oldest
4. Dispatch an action with the newly selected category
5. Record a metric that a category was selected

In order to transform this algorithm into an appropriate usage of the Redux pattern, we can separate this list into two parts: steps that have side-effects and steps which can be represented by pure state updates. In this case, only the steps that record metrics represent side-effects. This will mean that those steps should be moved into a middleware, and the rest can be moved into a reducer.

Here's how that might look:

> ```kotlin

Reviewer: From [my original comment](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/pull/1466#discussion_r1170798740):
> Here, you have made a change to replace the interactor with the dispatch call. Can you add an example of what the other end of the store looks like that connects to this change?
> 
> I'm trying to visualize how would features like bookmarks connect to the storage and the snackbar UI layer, or navigate.

I might have not been clear, sorry. It wasn't the redux/store part that is hard to visualize. It's the other end of the store where we now have a state change and we need to tell the UI (for example) to update. How will that work?

In the example of Pocket you've used, it falls under the Compose extensions that observe state changes. What about Android View code? We have plenty of that, so how will we observe and react to state changes there? We should be adding an example of that connecting piece more than the internals of how to use `lib-state` which we have plenty of examples in our code base.

If you're looking for ideas: I've tried tackling this problem by using individual [`AbstractBinding`](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/main/android-components/components/lib/state/src/main/java/mozilla/components/lib/state/helpers/AbstractBinding.kt) classes which observe, collect, and update which ever system needs to know about it. [`TabCounterBinding`](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/46f3836ae308bd5f050a226c1857363810e62000/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/tabstray/TabCounterBinding.kt) is one of many other "binding" classes in the tabs tray package. What I like about these types of classes are that they are small and easy to grok, testable, and not particularly tied to be part of the UI; use them for anything.

Author: Ah gotcha, thanks for clarifying. On the one hand, it almost seems like if we are investing in the code health of a feature by refactoring it for architectural consistency it would also make sense to me to update that area to Compose - but that probably won't match reality in every case. I'll work up a View example as well

Reviewer: > ..to update that area to Compose - but that probably won't match reality in every case.

Not all state is tied to UI, it's just one example of something that needs to react to a state change. We can have other systems that need to observe state changes and do other work. Having all of those in middlewares do not always make sense too.

I would use the tabs tray as [another](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/main/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/tabstray/browser/BrowserTabsAdapter.kt#L61) [example](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/main/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/tabstray/browser/AbstractBrowserTrayList.kt#L35-L37), where we need to observe and react to state but it doesn't always mean a middleware or constructor dependency makes sense.

Author: > Not all state is tied to UI, it's just one example of something that needs to react to a state change.

While true, I think the context of thinking about this in terms of interactors/controllers tends to frame it as more of a discussion of UI state.

> We can have other systems that need to observe state changes and do other work. Having all of those in middlewares do not always make sense too.

If we need to react to state changes, that means observing them from somewhere. We could have free-floating global components that observe for the lifetime of the app, or we could have middleware react to the changes. Otherwise, even if they aren't necessarily tied to the UI these components seem like they would at least be tied to the lifecycle of UI components.

> I would use the tabs tray as [another](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/910afa889ebc5222a1b9a877837de5c55244d441/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/tabstray/browser/BrowserTabsAdapter.kt#L61) [example](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-android/blob/910afa889ebc5222a1b9a877837de5c55244d441/fenix/app/src/main/java/org/mozilla/fenix/tabstray/browser/AbstractBrowserTrayList.kt#L35-L37), where we need to observe and react to state but it doesn't always mean a middleware or constructor dependency makes sense.

These are good examples, thank you! But I assume this statement was unrelated to the rest of the comment, since this is UI code? Were you thinking these should just be included as examples in the doc?

Reviewer: Yeah, fair points. Maybe lets assume they are all UI components: you have Compose covered, so maybe add an example how an observation to update and Android View would work, and that should be enough. 🙂

Reviewer: I see you went with using the `AbstractBinding` direction for connecting Android Views with store observations - that's fair. FWIW, just stating it in this doc like the Compose example would have sufficed. 🙂
